[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove, and
this is the second part
of our two-part interview
with Dr. Elizabeth Targ, one
of the country's
foremost researchers
on psychic and
spiritual healing,
the subject of our program.
Dr. Targ is director of the
Complementary Medicine Research
Institute at the California
Pacific Medical Center
in San Francisco.
She's also a professor in
the Department of Psychiatry
at the University of
California Medical
Center in San Francisco.
Welcome again, Elizabeth.
>> Thanks very much.
I'm happy to be here.
>> It's a pleasure to be with
you and to talk and share with
our audience the very exciting,
pivotal research that you are
doing in the field
of psychic healing.
In our first program,
you described work
with healers who were using a
method which researchers have
come to call a distant
mental influence.
We could think of it as
psychic or spiritual healing.
And you were working
with AIDS patients.
>> That's right.
>> And what you said is--
many things that you said,
but one of the things
you pointed out is that there
was a dramatic difference
between the patients who
received the healing intentions
and those who did not.
And you listed for us maybe
a dozen different parameters,
qualities that you
observed in order
to measure that difference.
And I think it would
be interesting to go
through the different physical
and psychological effects
of the distant healing.
>> Sure.
What we saw in our study--
and it's important, I
think, for the viewers
to understand that this is a
study where the patients did
not know whether or not they
were receiving healing efforts
from these different healers.
>> So it couldn't
have been suggestion.
>> It couldn't have
been suggestion,
couldn't have been--
>> A placebo effect.
>> --a placebo in that sense.
The people who received
the healing had
fewer new illnesses,
and the illnesses they
had were less severe.
They also had fewer
doctor visits,
in fact quite
dramatically so, which
is something at some
points we thought
might be interesting to the
different HMO and insurance
companies.
They had fewer hospitalizations.
And the hospitalizations
they had were shorter.
We had 68 hospital days in
the control group versus 10
in the treatment group.
And remembering
those hospital days
usually come in at about
$500 to $900 a day,
that is a really important
difference in terms
of medical utilization.
We also looked at
psychological outcomes.
And we found that the people
who were in the treatment group
went down in their psychological
distress scores by 25 points.
The people who were
in the control group
went up in their psychological
distress scores by 14 points.
And so that was also a
significant difference.
When we broke that down to find
out which were the measures
within the distress, we found
that the treatment patients
were showing less depression
and less anxiety and less anger
and that they showed more vigor.
They also showed less
cognitive difficulty,
which has been a really
important problem for people
with HIV.
We also looked at the CD4
counts, their T-cell count,
which people have been
very interested in.
We did not see a significant
difference between the two
groups on that measure.
In fact, we saw what
you would expect,
that since all of these
patients in both groups
were getting top-notch
medical care,
that everybody had
some improvement
in their T-cell count,
which was good news.
And we also looked at mortality.
In our first study,
we had found--
in our pilot study, which
just had 20 patients in it,
at that point in the control
group, 40% of those patients
died over the
period of the study,
whereas nobody in the
treatment groups died.
>> Well, that's significant.
>> It was very remarkable, and
it was really what spurred us
to go ahead and do
this larger trial.
And in the new
trial, what we did
is in the first trial we had
controlled for the things--
you have to think
about what else
could have made a difference?
Was one group sicker
than the other?
Had one group been
sick with HIV longer?
Had one had more illnesses?
Were they taking
different medications?
We looked at all those
things in the first trial.
And then when we
went to look at age,
we found that the people who
were in the control group
were somewhat older.
So we thought, maybe
that was an explanation.
Because these trials
were always looking for,
is there anything different
between the groups?
So in this in the new
trial, we balanced
for 23 different baseline
variables, including
religious beliefs and belief
in distant healing and--
>> So that just by random you
wouldn't have a population more
likely to improve.
>> Right.
And what we found is
that there were not
any significant differences
on those measures
in the second trial.
In the second trial,
there was no difference--
there was no significant
difference in mortality.
There was one
unfortunate patient
who did die who was in
the control group who
didn't get this treatment.
But the treatments
for AIDS have gotten
to be so much better that people
are doing really much, much
better these days.
>> Well, that's good.
And now the government has
funded you to do a third study.
>> That's right.
>> They're satisfied enough
with the rigor of your research
in the first two.
>> I think they were
very excited about it.
And what we're going
to be doing now
is looking at even more
biological measures
and also looking at people
testing healers who--
or people as
healers who have not
had previous experience,
which is a difference.
>> Now in our first interview,
in the first part of this
two-part series, you told me
that on one occasion you had
attended a medical conference
at Harvard University looking
at this phenomenon, distant
mental influence as a healing
modality.
And many researchers were there,
but only under the condition
that they attend anonymously.
There wasn't a membership list.
>> That's right.
>> How does the
medical community,
when you talk to mainstream
medical professionals today
about your research,
how do they respond?
>> The response has been
almost completely positive.
I really have the
feeling that people
have been all sort of secretly
hoping this would work.
Including a lot of medical
professionals and researchers
who are people too, after all.
>> Even skeptics.
We have now presented this work
at quite a number of mainstream
medical conferences.
And the uniform response
has been, this is amazing.
This is extremely
well controlled.
When are you going
to do it again?
And in the new study,
what we want to do
is expand our measures.
And we're looking
for whether there
are what you call
biological markers,
whether there's anything to
give us an indication of how
it might be working.
And the other
thing we want to do
is to find out more about what
the range of possible effects
might be.
>> It is interesting that you
use the phrase "the patients
who received the
healing treatment."
Because on the one
hand, you see that there
are measurable effects.
>> Right.
>> On the other hand, you
have healers who are told
to concentrate on
particular patients.
But we have no clue
as to what mechanism--
if it is a mechanism.
I suspect it's non-mechanistic--
that links these.
>> We really have no
idea how it works.
And that is something that
makes some researchers
nervous in doing
these experiments.
But the fact is that scientific
methodology is actually
perfectly set up to allow
us to test things, to test,
does it work or does it not?
Even if we don't know how.
>> There are many treatments
in medicine that are known
to work, and we don't
know exactly how.
I think aspirin.
>> Aspirin is an example.
Quinine was an example.
There have been a lot of
things in that category
over the years.
We are trying to
do some studies.
We are doing some
studies that may give us
some hints about this.
My colleague Dr.
Garret Yount, who's
a molecular geneticist
at our institute,
is doing studies
of healing attempts
by qigong masters who use a
kind of Chinese energy healing.
And they're trying to
improve the survival of cells
in test tubes or
in Petri dishes.
And that gives him an
opportunity, for example,
to look then at what specific
genetic or enzyme or protein
mechanism might be
accounting for that.
And he's also having very, very
promising results at this time.
>> On the other hand, I think
if you talk to the healers
themselves, if you ask them,
many of them would say, well,
God does the healing.
>> Many of them would.
Interestingly, not
all of them would.
When you look at the people
who were healers in our study,
about 50% of them describe
themselves as energy healers.
And a significant
number of those
also felt that it was
a spiritual healing.
There were only
about 15% who said
that what they felt
they were doing
was a purely devotional
process or in relation to God
or a higher power.
I think science is going
to have to continue
to work to develop
terms to understand
what people are doing.
There are many, many ways
that people look at it.
And when we try to divide out
whether it made a difference
what one healer was
doing versus another--
>> What their
belief system was--
>> --what their
belief system was,
we have not yet found something.
Now, that doesn't mean
that there isn't something.
But at least in our
first examination
so far, we're not finding
any evidence that at least
among the people who were
healers in our study,
that one approach was
better than the other.
>> I do recall Dr. Bernard
Grad at McGill University,
if I remember correctly,
discovered that if a person is
depressed, they could
have an opposite effect.
If they attempt to do
healing, I think with plants,
he said they had the brown
thumb effect rather than
the green thumb.
Elizabeth, we're
going to take a break.
>> OK.
>> We'll be back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
My guest is Dr. Elizabeth
Targ, one of America's leading
researchers in the field of
psychic and spiritual healing.
Elizabeth, now we've covered
the empirical studies
that you've been doing with
distant mental influence,
people who receive the
healing intentionalities
of a professional healer.
You've also done
work with patients
who get involved in support
groups of a spiritual nature.
>> That's right.
The work we're doing
with the support groups
is a program comparing
two different kinds
of group psychotherapy,
which, as people know,
has already been demonstrated
in studies by David
Spiegel at Stanford to be
very beneficial for women
with breast cancer.
What we were
interested in is what
other kinds of psychotherapy
approaches or experiences
might be helpful.
So we've done a study now
where we randomized women
to either be in a standard
group psychotherapy of the type
that's widely available
in the community,
or to be in a group therapy
program that involved
spiritual exploration through
many different modalities,
including meditation, yoga,
practices with contemplations
on loving kindness and on
forgiveness, also on death.
They do work with
movement and dance
and different kind
of ritual forms,
such as the traditional counsel
process that derives out
of the Native American
tradition for storytelling
and witnessing.
>> These are all modalities that
in previous generations were
quite separate and
distinct from medicine.
>> Yeah, they've rarely been
used in an active medical
center.
And they've been not yet
very well incorporated
into psychology.
>> Although I would venture
to say that in that age
of Hippocrates, in the
ancient Greek healing temples,
that is exactly how it was done.
>> Absolutely.
This is where medicine
really came from.
And it's very similar
to, as you say,
the ancient Greek traditions,
the shamanic traditions.
These are all
techniques which have
existed in many, many
cultures throughout the world.
>> And what are you finding?
>> What we're finding is-- it's
very interesting, actually.
We've randomized
women to these groups.
So they're not
getting to choose.
And that's hard for all
of us, I think mostly hard
for the women.
But all of us would like
to see people choosing.
But what we actually
did is we wanted
to know, how do these
experiences affect everybody,
not just people who
are drawn to them.
And what we're finding is that
regardless of people's, say,
particular spiritual beliefs
or affinity when they come in,
that the women who are
randomized to the what we call
integrated program, the
psycho-spiritual program,
are showing increases
in formal measures
of so-called
spiritual well-being.
They're also showing
significant improvement
in their levels of distress
and depression and anxiety
and improved social
functioning all those things,
just like the other group.
So that's what we would expect.
Although certainly some
people have been afraid
that if you bring people into
these kinds of meditations
and imagery that it's
just a form of denial,
and it's just going to prevent
them from really doing the work
they need to do to learn
to cope with their illness.
But they've shown
not only improvement
in all those measures,
but also improvement
in measures of faith
and peacefulness
and a construct called
embracing life, which
has to do with actually
accepting death,
a feeling that they're getting
nourishment from nature,
a feeling that there is a
rightness to what happens day
to day.
>> Formal measures of
spiritual well-being.
>> Formal measures,
that's right.
>> I've never heard
that phrase before.
To me-- and I've interviewed
hundreds of people
on spirituality--
it has always seemed
like one of the most
indefinable of all topics.
And now you have
formal measures.
>> Well, I would agree that
it's an indefinable measure.
And I would suggest
that there are
things that give us a hint
about where people are
putting their consciousness.
>> But now from a
medical perspective,
I can imagine somebody may
grow spiritually enormously
and still die from
their illness.
>> That's certainly possible.
And that's one of the
questions we're asking.
So in our study,
we do not yet have
any information about the
long-term medical effects.
>> That's your goal.
>> That's right.
That's one of the things
we'd like to find out.
But at the same time,
what we're finding
is that the women going
through this program
are more content in their
lives, are talking with us
about being able to make
extraordinary transformation
in their personal lives
and their connections
to other people.
And by my way of
thinking, that's
really what life
is all about, too.
>> You know, not long
ago, I interviewed one
of your colleagues,
Dr. Jean Shinoda Bolen,
about women and men facing
life-threatening illnesses.
And she said that the
very fact that one
faces a life-threatening
condition
triggers a kind of
spiritual process.
>> I would agree.
I might say it slightly
differently, though.
I'd say that at least it creates
the opportunity for movement
in that direction.
I think there's some people
who will not do that.
They may not have the
support to do that,
or they may not
have the interest.
It definitely triggers a crisis.
And one of the
things we had to do
for the study, if we were going
to do a study of spirituality,
is we had to define it.
And we defined it as to do
with meaning and purpose,
connection, and used
Frances Vaughan's term,
the subjective
experience of the sacred.
Developing a
life-threatening illness
is a challenge in each
one of those areas.
It challenges our
sense of identity.
We may not be able to be who
we thought we were anymore,
do our job.
We lose, often, a sense of
connection with our community
and our family.
And a lot of people
become completely numb
in the face of illness.
So even by that very
simple definition,
I think you can say that a
life-threatening illness is
a spiritual crisis.
The question in crisis
is always the issue
of danger and opportunity.
And so what we're hoping
to do in our program
is create support
for women to take
advantage of that opportunity.
>> Now, in general, people--
women and men who get
involved in support groups
do better than those
who don't, regardless
of what kind of a
support group it is.
>> There haven't been so many
studies on different kinds.
And certain there have
been-- this is a new area,
but there's certainly been
evidence that they do better
in some kinds.
>> So your intention is to look
at spiritual types of support
groups.
>> Exactly.
Exactly.
>> Well, it would seem to me
that if the earlier principle
that you were looking
at, distant influence,
if that principle holds, and
if it's a widely distributed
skill, it would certainly
mean that a person could heal
themselves also.
>> You would think so.
Actually, there was
an interesting study
by Dr. Sean O'Laoire who is a
psychologist and also a priest.
And he did a study
of distant healing.
And an interesting
thing is the people
who were healers in his study
had no previous experience
as healers.
And what he found at
the end of the study
is that the healers
themselves had
shown significant
psychological improvement.
And so when you ask him, well,
why do you think that happened?
Well, what is it you
taught these people?
How did they do their healing,
since they never did it?
What he did was he instructed
these novice healers
to sit every day, to calm
and center themselves,
to imagine themselves surrounded
by a bubble of white light,
and to allow a sensation
of love to permeate
themselves and
extend to the patient
they were supposed to heal.
I think it's not surprising that
that made them feel better too.
And so there's a
kind of overlap area,
it seems, in these
healing practices,
that some are very
direct, and then some
may also extend over space,
maybe over time as well.
>> Well, your
father, Russell Targ,
has written a book recently
called "The Heart of The Mind,"
in which he suggests that all
authentic spiritual traditions
have in common the understanding
that we can reside in love,
that love is a fundamental
spiritual experience that cuts
across all belief systems.
And your work seems to
suggest, and the work
you just cited suggests that
the very experience of allowing
oneself to be in a peaceful,
calm, loving, compassionate
state sends out, one
might say, vibrations
into the environment.
It's good for you.
It's good for everyone else.
>> It may well be the case.
Sometimes I think of it
as a form of relaxation.
If people are well known to do
better medically if they learn
to relax through yoga or
meditation or stretching,
maybe there is an
extended relaxation
that lets more of that love in.
>> Love may be the
best medicine of all.
In fact, certainly I know from
my interview with Dr. Dean
Ornish that he claimed the one
factor that was the strongest
factor ever researched
is simply people
who are in good relationships.
>> Yeah, it's interesting.
And one of the things we
observed in our distant healing
study is really the
generosity of the healers
who participated.
We had people who participated
with us who their job in life,
they are paid as healers
like any other professionals.
And many of them donated
to us more than 100 hours
of their professional time,
for which they were never paid.
They knew that
they would never be
able to get personal
acknowledgment
of the fact of their
participation in the study.
And yet they were
willing to do this.
And in fact, many of them have
volunteered to do it again.
>> They're not in it for
the fame or the money.
>> They're not.
They're not.
>> And I imagine it's a
service to all of humanity.
And so I'm thrilled,
Dr. Elizabeth
Targ, to be having this
discussion with you now.
It has been a real pleasure.
We've been able to cover
the empirical side,
the spiritual side of things,
the medical issues involved.
And I think it's a great tribute
to you and to the institutions
that support you that this
research is taking place.
>> More than anything else,
I just hope it makes possible
for more people to make use of
these treatments and to study
them so we can really
understand them.
>> Thanks for being
with me, Elizabeth.
And thank you for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]